Hello, welcome. It's May 21st, 2025. We're in active inference guest stream 107.1 with David Benramo. The need for a common language to unite levels of explanation in mental health, the potential of computational psychiatry. So, thank you for coming, David. looking forward to the presentation and to anyone's questions in the live chat. So, thank you to you. Perfect. Thank you so much. It's a pleasure to be here. Um I don't think I've done a live stream before, so this is a new new experience for me. Uh looking forward to any questions that come from the audience. Um so today I'll be uh talking uh a little bit about some work we've been doing. um much of which is is relevant either directly involving or or peripherally involving active inference um around um uh levels of explanation in in mental health research and um uh and some new and more recent uh theoretical work that we've done in in incorporating a effective states uh into understanding um things like uh psychosis development which is a particular interest of mine. I am a psychiatrist um at um the Douglas Mental Health University University Institute which is a mental health hospital in Montreal, Canada. Um I did a master's degree with Carl Fristen um at UCL where we did some some work that I'll be talking about today on modeling hallucinations. Um I have a lab at McGill and I also happen to be uh the chief science officer of a mental health company which not really relevant to the the talk today. It's not active inference focused at all. Um so just uh keep in mind uh the uh the disclaimer. Um so my my journey uh to towards active inference and towards computational psychiatry uh in general really was uh motivated by this difficulty I had as a medical student as a premedical student with um the idea that everything seemed to be about cutting things into from bigger boxes into smaller boxes. And you know it's nice to know how many boxes you you have to deal with but that doesn't necessarily tell you anything about what the boxes are actually doing. Um so you know if you start with humans uh we can split those into individuals and societies and then individuals have a bunch of things that are phenomena and then those phenomena um we think you know are are rooted in the brain and then the brain has regions and then those light up with different tasks and what have you um on fMRI and other things and then those regions have circuits and then those circuits have neurons and astroytes and ga and etc and those have genes which are regulated by uh by genetic regulators, etc. And so it all just kind of felt like we were just breaking things into smaller boxes. And this is not a dig against a reductionist approach at all. Um it just didn't feel like we were quite getting at mechanism. Um and I always wondered, you know, how does all this work? What is the mechanism? What are we actually trying to achieve? What is the what is the thing that is being computed? um you know and of course for all those of you who uh are interested in in computational work this is this is by no means a an un foreign concept but since I'm sure many people listening aren't necessarily thinking about this from a medical or mental health standpoint um I just sort of wanted to give you an insight into how how I think about this and the utility of computational psychiatry. So um the way I see it is that it's using new and old computational techniques to understand the healthy and pathological mind or the environment. no reason why we can't use it to explain the environment and it comprised of me different methods that focus on answering different questions. What is thought and behavior which we think is the manipulation of information um and what answers are useful um and those are the ones that uh can provide predictive tools for clinical preventative use. Sometimes the useful answers are not the um the ones that teach us anything about the brain and vice versa. So we'll be focusing today mostly on the what is thought and behavior piece. the predictive stuff is uh I have another talk for that not really super relevance to to active inference per se um you know but it gave us these two camps of computational psychiatry the modelers which is where I'll be focusing most of my focus today and then the predictors which build models that are I say useful as a facicious way um of of indicating that sometimes the models that we build for prediction are very helpful we don't necessarily learn anything from them but they give us something useful um and sometimes you have to make that choice between utility and uh and and mechanis mechanistic insight. Uh though obviously with more and more technical um progress the the the distance between those two camps is being reduced. Um so we're going to be focusing really on model models of psychosis development from individual patient level to the social level. And um psychosis is something I've always been uh fascinated by uh clinically um and sort of epistemologically. How does one generate um uh an understanding of uh phenomena and and beliefs that that aren't really there? Um what is the what is the um the uh the the understanding of how we can have a base optimal agent the human brain that is generating something that seems from the outside perspective to to not be optimal. Obviously of course it is but uh for for complex and interesting reasons. Um so we built uh in my master's degree um with Carl a computational model of auditory hallucinations and this was because uh schizophrenia is is a common and devastating condition and about 70% of people with schizophrenia will have auditory hallucinations. Um we often find ourselves at a therapeutic deadlock because likely of poor mechanistic understanding. We don't really know how uh the brain is generating uh psychotic symptoms and so we uh don't really have any new ideas about treatment. the first new drug for schizophrenia um RXT which came out recently. Um, I went to a talk recently and the thing they were all interested in was how do we relate this back to to the dopamine story which has been very influential for many years obviously and I went up to the speaker after it. I said, "Isn't it a shame that you have a drug with a completely new mechanism of action and you feel the need to relate it back to dopamine? Is it not possible that there might be other mechanisms at play here that might be interesting or novel or useful? We don't have to always have the same answer." Um because having the same answer all the time is what's led us to having a therapeutic deadlock. Um not to say the dopamine isn't important. It is. But there's there's possibly and likely more to the story than that. Um they have a rich and rich and complex phenomenology that presents specific targets for modeling which is which is always nice to have if you have phenomenology that you can reproduce in your models. So we decided to use active inference. Um I have a slide here on what is active inference which uh I'm assuming for this population I do not have to go through. So I'm going to go through it extraordinarily quickly just because it's on my slide list but I'm not going to I'm going to assume this is not news to anybody. Um so Beijian theory we seek to minimize uncertainty surprise or free energy about causes sensations. We act to do this. Uh it can be formulated as exploration exploitation trade-off. Um, and we build, it assumes that we build models of the world and act to maximize the accuracy of this model while minimizing complexity. And if you're in a dark room and you see scary yellow eyes, you will act to produce more information to better understand the causes of your sensations, which in this case was a harmless kitty, but could not have been a harmless kitty. And therefore, we acted to um to get ourselves more information so that we could reduce uncertainty. I'm assuming this is not a surprise to anybody. So, I'm just going to move on. Um, so to the fun stuff. So, uh, how might hallucinations occur in a base optimal context? Um, you know, the, uh, the idea really was we've got our priors, our likelihoods, and our posterior. Our posterior is where the percept is happening in our conceptualization. We have, um, a state that we infer to be the case in the world, that there is a cause of sensation um, that is present uh, when there is none um, from a quote unquote objective standpoint. Um, and that's got to be happening through some combination of prior and likelihood and uh differential precisions on on those two um that give us posterior that is not consistent with everybody else's consensual uh hallucination of reality, if you will. Um, and so we created a couple of incilical models that uh were able to generate these kinds of um uh hallucinations. um and it taught us a lot about uh the possible implementation or biologically of what might be going on when people hallucinate. So the first model we built was so this is a model it's a 2018 paper it's a bit old at this point but it's collective inference and hallucinations um and the next three models are all from the same paper um and this is uh the best we were able to do in terms of graphical representation I'm not very good at graphics uh Thomas Parr who was my co-author here and my sort of co-supervisor for my my master's degree um helped a lot with making these somewhat palatable but they're still a little bit overwhelming. Um the idea here was that our states uh are representing our percept our posterior. Um whether or not you're hearing somebody speaking. Um we have outcomes which are the real outcomes in the world whether or not you are speaking or and whether or not you're hearing anybody else speak. Um and then we have our policies um where we um um are preparing ourselves to either listen or to speak depending on where we think uh we're at in a in a turntaking conversation. Um the first thing we found is that agents hallucinate when um you uh reduce the sensory precision the zeta uh on the A matrix sufficiently such that essentially exterior information no longer can correct anomalous uh prior beliefs. The prior beliefs here are being engendered by the um by the policies by the sensory expectations of the policies. So if you expect to be listening to somebody at the next time step because you're in a turn taking conversation you expect the other person to speak. Um if the person doesn't speak normally you would correct that expectation with sensory information. Um but what what ends up happening is that uh if you reduce the the precision of that sensory information um you can no longer make that correction and then you actually generate um a a a percept to fulfill your expectation. So that was the first piece. Then we did the same thing uh but now with a slightly different agent um we modified the um the gamma. So the prior precision uh over the um the policies um and gamma as many of you might know um has been previously linked to dopamineergic function uh in work by Schwarzenbeck in the past. Um and so uh the idea was we know that dopamine is relevant obviously in psychosis. how what is the computational kind of meaning behind that? And the idea here was that uh in cases of um uh permissive low sensory precision, low likelihood precision um but you had to have the low likelihood precision um high gamma or an increase in dopamine was able to kick the agent over into hallucination. Um so uh but it only worked if you also had the reduction in sensory precision. So dopamine seem to be sort of like facilitating but not necessarily the the primary uh mover which makes sense because patients with schizophrenia don't lose all of their symptoms when they're treated with antisycchotics. They stop hallucinating most of the time not always but most of the time. Um but they may they still have a lot of the other symptoms that come with that. Um so something about the brain clearly hasn't changed. It's not all dopamine dysregulation. Uh there's other pieces going on here. And to get a sense of what that might have been, we did a lesion study which was a lot of fun because I was, you know, a master student fresh out of uh medical school and I'm doing computational lesion studies and I felt pretty darn cool. Obviously, this is something many people do and by no means is unique, but I felt very fun. I felt very fun doing it. Um, and so what we did here was that we built a bunch of uh we built an agent that had many different policies. Um uh and one of those policies would lead to hallucinations. Um we however one the version A of the agent the unleioned agent had enough policies enough flexibility if you will um that if you uh were to reduce its sensor precision all the way down to basically zero. It always had a policy that was correct that was that was that was consistent with the world around it and so it didn't hallucinate. Then you leion that policy. you you destroy the neurons that are encoding that those expectations of the world and now you get hallucinations because you don't have a um uh you don't have a prior that is that is that is non-maladaptive that can rescue your phenotype. And so we were able to show that really it was an it was uh there was an element of lack of sort of cognitive flexibility of being able to find solutions um that were not you know essentially there is a hallucination. uh when you get rid of all other options and sensor precision is low uh and you have maladaptive priors, you get uh you get hallucinations. And so the conceptualization that we had here was maladaptive but strongly held um prior uh could not be corrected because of imprecise sensory information which led to a precise prior belief, imprecise sensory reference view hallucinations. This is uh not the only way of thinking about this even from an active inference perspective. There's other ways of thinking about hallucinations that are are very interesting and we can talk about if people are interested but this was the conceptualiz conceptualization we came to. It was very consistent with um with patients that I had uh seen in the hospital. Um I had a patient once who um you know uh what uh what she would do was that she would have very poor sensory precision on essentially all information. and you would be talking to her and she was mostly ignoring you. Um, the environment around her, she would sort of spend her time mostly focus focused on what she was thinking about and not really paying attention to everything else around her. Except when there were sirens. Whenever there were sirens, she was convinced that the police were coming to get her. Even though she was already in the hospital, the police had already come to get her. It had already happened. She was convinced they were coming to take her again. And I looked at her and I said, "You've already been taken. You're here. They're not taking you anywhere else. they already brought you here. Um, that didn't make a difference to her. She was convinced. Um, so she was able to to to allocate sensory precision to specific kinds of stimuli, but generally uh was ignoring the rest of the world. And we're going to talk a little bit about that when we get to the affective uh model that I I I alluded to at the beginning, which is a paper we recently just published. Well, sorry, it's not published yet. It's was accepted with minor revisions at&p. Um, and we're hoping to get it published relatively soon. um but it's up as a pre-print that you can access. Um and we'll talk a little bit about about where that story comes into play. So that that one patient uh and her story has been with me the entirety of my career at this point because she's really inspired my master's work, this most recent paper. Um I actually saw her uh after my master's work and I sat down with her. I said, you know, you inspired my thesis and I sat down with her and I tried to go over it with her. Um, I think that was probably more for me than it was for her. Um, but it was nice to sort of let her know that that her story uh sort of inspired some some academic uh work and may help other patients in the future. Anyh who, so this precise prior imprecise uh evidence view of uh of hallucinations has had some experimental validation. Many of you might be familiar with the landmark study by Powers at all in 2017 in science that used the HGF, the hierarchical Gaussian filter, which which is essentially simplified active inference. um um and where they found that uh stronger prior waiting was in fact um uh the driver compared to sensory evidence was the driver of hallucinations in both people with hallucinations who had psychosis and people who didn't have psychosis but had hallucinations kind of like spirit mediums and and uh and people uh who are voice hearers but don't have an illness. So in order to hear hallucinations it is irrelevant to have an overweighting of prior compared to sensory evidence. This didn't really get us much about the sensory evidence in particular because it's just a question about differential waiting, not necessarily the sensory evidence itself. So I did a study with with Al who is my mentor now and I'm very grateful to him um where we looked at um uh the same task slightly differently with with a linguistic focus in a hallucination prone individuals in a general population sample. In that sample, we found an interesting thing which was that patients with um with um more hallucination proness or recent hallucinations in the general population were more likely to require louder stimuli when establishing their prior. So a suggestion that perhaps they uh uh need to be provided more precise sensory information which which would suggest that they have lower sensory precision overall. Um the priors are also more resistant to change in uh more versus less hallucination prone individuals. They decay slower. So the way the task works is that you um you condition people to hallucinate um and uh over time uh you generate more and more trials where they will get a condition stimulus that is supposed to generate the hallucination but there's no actual auditory stimulus present. Um, so they hear they see like a checkerboard. It's like checkerboard sound, checkerboard sound, checkerboard sound until they learn that there's a checkerboard sound association. Then you show the checkerboard without the sound. Uh, but you you you present white noise and they'll hear the sound and the white noise. Over time, you present more and more trials where there's the checkerboard but no sound. So that's technically evidence against the association between the checkerboard and the sound. So you would expect the prior to decay and it does, but it decays it decays more slowly in patient in people with more hallucination proness. um which suggests either the prior is very strong and and doesn't decay or that the sensory information that is being presented is not sufficient to decay um that prior. Um so so far we focused really on the individual patient. Um but the social environment is key in psychosis development and often people in psychosis uh early onset or or development of psychosis stages um will have a very poor um uh social bonds. They will socially isolate and uh there's sort of a um an overall uh reduction in in in social contact. Um so we investigated in a theoretical paper that I published again with Al how different kinds of treatments um programs could impact computational processes underlying psychotic symptoms. Why? Because some of the most successful programs for treatment of psychosis besides providing medication provide essentially a uh forced social interaction because you've got intensive case management or you've got uh sort of a very comprehensive program that involves therapists and doctors and nurses and you basically are provided with a group of friends and people um that uh well not friends obviously they're your caregivers but they're they're people that you have uh contact with um which uh which which we thought might have an important as an important uh impact on uh computational mechanisms of of symptom development and maintenance. And so we looked at assertive community treatment which is basically when you have a team of people who will like show up at your house every day or every every couple of days and they will, you know, make sure you take your meds and they'll chat with you and make sure that your uh needs are taken care of and that you've got a good uh you know your housing is is is up to date, your your paying your stuff and all these things. Um it's a very effective way of helping these patients. For those of you who are not familiar with schizophrenia, that might sound extraordinarily invasive and paternalistic, that's probably because you haven't worked with many people uh who have uh serious psychotic illness. Um the reality is because of cognitive and negative symptoms, people really need a lot of help. Um and this uh this help is often uh either much appreciated or at least very useful for the person. And then coordinated specialty care clinics, which is basically like specialized clinics for people at at risk for psychosis or who've just started experiences experiencing psychosis, which is just a much more intensive. It's not just see your doctor every 3 months. You have a case manager, you have potentially a therapist, a nurse, um people who you can turn to when you need help. Um and so when we thought about this, we wanted to integrate the social with the the sort of individual and biological levels. Um and the idea really was uh that we could use computational psychiatry as a uh as a common language to integrate between these different levels. Um and the idea was that we could really we could we could look at this as as sort of a social treatment. So all these services are are making sure patients get their their their medications, but they're more effective than normal services. And we we assumed it was more than just people getting their antisycchotics. Um and so the idea was you know there could be different ways in which um the the access to a more more important social environment um uh a more active social environment might help you. So uh one might be improving sensory precision. So what do I mean by that? If you have um you know uh somebody who is coming to you and giving you good information that you trust, well maybe you are engaging with the world a bit better. Maybe you are artificially boosting the precision that you're placing on sensory information which may reduce um cuz we said the sensory precision is has to be low for the hall stations to obtain. So maybe that is helping to reduce your uh your uh your maladaptive low sensory precision. Um an expanded policy space increasing your cognitive flexibility either through cognitive remediation like formal therapy or just having people that you can discuss problems with and have a sort of extra brains around you that you can that you can problem solve with. um that might help expand your cognitive reserve uh if even artificially and therefore leave you less forced to rely on the priors that uh generate uh hallucinatory uh behavior. Um there's obviously the impact of medication which is reducing the prior precision over policies the gamma the dopamine so dopamine blockade um and then um potentially also reducing the influence of sensory priors. If you've learned that uh that hallucination should be present, for example, um and you have very strong sensory prior beliefs, um the the the the help from from therapists or from from clinicians that you trust over time to help you realize when those aren't present uh through things like CBT for psychosis u might reduce the strength of those sensory uh prior. So this is an idea. This is an example of how um the interaction with the social environment might actually have an impact on uh the computational mechanisms underlying um the uh the development and maintenance of psychotic symptoms. Um and then we sort of said okay fun this is a sort of an idea about treatment. We have an idea about what the symptoms are computationally when they're present. How about um uh symptom development? So um we had a um uh we recently published in biological psychiatry a theory of psychotic symptom development. Um and so uh here we really did try and integrate across the different levels of explanation from the cellular all the way to the behavioral. Um and uh the story we came up with was was this. We know in the beginning of psychosis that there are changes neurobbiologically that seem to have an a strong impact on um cortical excitability um and just the noise available in the cortex. Cortex degenerates and and degrades in many cases. White matter tracts are not as integral as they used to be. So information is less precise in the brain than it should be. So the idea was through things like the dis the hyperunction of NMDA receptors um and uh and later on dopamine disregulation you get hyperexitability um and decrease signal to noise radio in cortex signal to noise ratio in cortex. Um this leads to aarent prediction errors. um inappropriate learning. The inappropriate learning gives us delusional formation because um we uh we we learn uh we learn um uh priors that that aren't necessarily uh properly coherent with the evidence because the learning process has been sort of poisoned by um by uh by prediction errors um by aarent prediction errors, prediction errors that aren't really based on uh appropriate sensory information. Um so you start forming your delusions um and you start estimating higher environmental volatility because um you learn over time uh to that the environment is not um providing precise information because it's getting it's it's being f funneled through a very noisy cortex and so your impression of that is that the information itself the the environment itself isn't precise and so you don't really know that your own cortex is not precise precise anymore. Um all over all of this over time leads to a comp compensatory increase in prior strength which um probably is is uh is computationally manifested at least in part by dopamineergic dysregulation and the hyperdopinergic state that we see in many patients who who develop uh hallucinations and delusions and then you get your delusional conviction. So you actually believe the delusions that you that you've started to to generate um and then you generate uh hallucinations as well with the idea that the hallucinations probably are a reaction to the delusion formation. So you probably have your odd beliefs first and the hallucinations are generated um sort of with the delusions as a prior to those hallucinations. Um and uh we have several hypotheses that come from this directly that we could test with you know neurobiological and other other other tests. One of them was that we expected delusions to emerge before hallucinations which we actually showed to be the case in a in a companion paper to this um from uh three different data sets. Um hallucinations usually for most patients emerge after delusions which is in keeping with at least part of our model. Um one thing that however isn't covered in that model is affect um and the interpersonal aspect. And why is that important? It's important because if it was just noise, there's nothing to say that that noise should be negatively balanced, right? If it's just a question of of apparent prediction errors because of random cortical noise, well, you you would expect to have as many positive as as negative hallucinations, as many positive as negative delusions. That's not what we see. What we see is quite precisely that in patients people with with with with diagnosed illness you actually have far more uh negative uhly veilance hallucinations and delusions than you do have um positively or neutally veilance hallucinations or delusions. Um generally these are experienced as negative and not just scary because it's happening but the content is negative. So it's not like you're hearing a sound and you're scared because you're hearing a sound that isn't there. I mean that does happen but the the classical descriptions are the words I'm hearing the voice tell me are themselves negative. It's telling me that I'm bad or that I'm useless or worthless or that I should kill myself or that uh you know somebody wants to probe my brain or what have you or that the NSA is watching me. Um they are or the in Montreal a common one is that the mafia is after me because we have a mafia problem in Montreal. Um it's it's quite uh specific to the location you're in. Um so it the veilance of the experience itself is negative and so we kind of built an addition to this model uh that that that uh uh we we're going to talk about now. Um which really focused on the affective component. Um and you know we looked at previous handling of of affect and computational psychiatry. Um we looked at reinforcement learning drift diffusion modeling active inference and hierarchal gaussian filter models. Um active inference actually has done a lot of work or rather there's a lot of active inference work especially by Ryan Smith on uh modeling of um of affect um probably more than than most other and more comprehensively than most other um modeling um approaches though as often happens in active inference with less empirical validation which is sad. Um though Ryan has done a lot of good work in empirically validating a lot of his a lot of his models. Um the idea is that a lot of these models see a effective states um as uh a dynamic modulation of current and future expectations intimately linked with interception uh and individual differences in emotional awareness and to be both state and traitlike. So you can feel a certain way in the moment and also have a mood over a longer time. Um there wasn't as much of a of a focus however on how affect and and and social uh interactions interact and we know you know from anybody who's spoken to other human beings um interactions other people certainly has an effect on our mood. My apologies. Um so we actually built a a new version of our of our model. Uh it has every all the pieces that we talked about previously. Um but essentially we added uh an affective component. So in our new conceptualization um you have as we talked about degradation of cortical neural signals and increased expected sensory noise um which not only provides the the the soup in which you can develop delusions and and hallucinations and that is permissive to those but also directly affects affective states which makes sense because if you think about papers like um the affective papers by by Smith and Hesp um you know uh having uh knowing that one's model of the world is imprecise um is going to lead to a negative effective outcome because we would like to have precise models of the world. If we find ourselves in a state in which our model of the world is not precise because we are not because our our cortical machinery is not precise. So we're not able to integrate sensory information very very effectively. We're going to notice this and we're going to have negative out a effect as a as a result. Um the um other idea we had was that and this is the disconnection hypothesis that that Carl has written a lot about. Um we know that there's degradation of connections between temporal uh and frontal regions. Generally speaking when that happens because a lot of the the emotional stuff is in the temporal lobe uh and it's being uh regulated by the the frontal lobe. um if you don't have effective connectivity between those regions um there may be sort of um an overabundance of of negative a effect. So we have a negative affective state. This negative act effective state actually uh then does exactly what affect has been shown to do in many other computational modeling approaches. Um it will bias your expectations of the future which makes sense. If we expect bad things to happen, we will take actions that will align with that expectation to protect ourselves. Um so our expectations our priors become more and more negative over time. Normally we would have our observations to rescue this. So if you know we we have a bad day where we're not somebody who who has psychosis, we have a bad day um we should be able to over the next couple of days if good things happen kind of recalibrate our expectations of the future. But if our if our if our our likelihood precision is low and we can't use information uh effectively, we may not be able to recalibrate as effectively. In addition, um, affect has been shown to to to to modify how we explore the environment. Um, and the idea here being that we are probably going to be negatively biasing our exploration. Um, we're going to be uh expecting negative outcomes. We will be looking out for negative outcomes because they're generally worse for us than positive outcomes are good for us. Right? If there's a line in the forest, that's more important not to miss than a cookie on the ground. Um, and so we're going to be biased also towards uh negative uh interpretations of the world and and and and exploring negative outcomes and ignoring the positive ones. Um this leads to a more and more and more negative uh posterior um which uh affects our long-term beliefs because if we keep in the moment experiencing negative uh beliefs about what's going on that's going to change our longunning priors um which uh over time might cause us to socially isolate um and eventually become the priors that lead to um hallucinations and delusions. And this is why patients have specifically negatively veilance hallucinations and delusions. Interestingly, in people who are healthy voice hearers, you don't get a lot of negative affect and often their hallucinations and delusions are much more positive or they're more spiritual. They're not they're not they're not disabling because they're not associated or not as dis obviously some people still struggle but they're not they're cl they're not clinical people by definition. So generally speaking, they're functional and they have, you know, much more positive or and healthy in in many cases relationships with their with their experiences. And so one hypothesis for why this might be would be that they don't have the the cortical degeneration that leads to the negative affect that leads to the specifically negatively violent veilance uh priors over time. um and why they can go about their lives being you know spirit mediums or what have you and living normal happy fulfilling lives and people with schizophrenia uh not so much uh when it comes to their hallucinations and delusions um so it's not the hallucination itself that becomes the focus it's really the effective and and functional outcomes which is I think a much more humane way of approaching it I don't I tell patients this all the times if they come to me and they have a hallucination and they don't doesn't bother them and they don't care and doesn't affect their daily life or they have a positive association with it. I don't really care. Doesn't really bother me. I treat symptoms. That's not a symptom in my opinion. Right. I have a patient actually who has schizophrenia, a very mild case, but she's she's doing very well. Um, we treated her for her very negative hallucinations and over time she had one voice left that became a positive voice. She was able to shift it into a a positive kind of friend that she can bounce ideas off of and that doesn't bother her when she doesn't want it to bother her. And I looked at her and I said, "I mean, if you want, we can keep increasing the dose of your medication until it's gone, but I don't know if we need to, if your life is fine right now." And she said, "Honestly, I'm okay with it." And we left it. And she's fine and happy with with that voice remaining. Um, she's very open about it, talks about it. Um, and uh, and it doesn't for me, it's not a symptom if it's not if it's not causing her distress, right? And I think it's because we were able to help her change her affective uh view of the symptoms um her experience of those symptoms and her brain also I think was more intact than most patients uh and she was able and we also treated her very quickly um and she was we were able to to make that change um and she she's having a better outcome because of it. Um so in summary uh computational psychiatry can be used uh to integrate across multiple levels of explanation. Um we can link the social neurobiological and individual levels of explanation. Uh the core next up of course is empirical validation development of novel treatments based on all of this. Um and um uh we have the two recent reviews that are both up and and available to read. um in those we have generated very specific model predictions for empirical validation. So um both from a computational standpoint but also phenomenologically like we actually say for example if this model is true we expect that you know if you treat patients who are at risk for psychosis for their negative effect during the risk period we don't necessarily expect that to stop transition to psychosis but we expect the intensity and the negativity of the psychotic phenomena to be less negative and less intense when psychosis does onset. Um so that's a very specific re prediction. Um uh that is probably uh only true if the affect really has a something to do with the the veilance of the uh of the priors which drive the hallucinations afterwards. Um we're also working on an a effect a version of the conditional hallucinations task uh the one that Dr. Powers developed that I talked about before. Um and the results so far seem to be consistent with the idea that um you know uh uh prior beliefs uh about negative things are kind of privileged in patient populations compared to prior beliefs about negative things um and will lead to more hallucinations and and higher prior waiting. Um and that my friends is uh is that um before we finish up and and and ask uh people to ask questions um I try to keep it to 45 minutes so that we have time for questions. Um I'd like to invite everybody who's here um to the 6th International Workshop on active inference October 15th to 17th in Montreal Canada where I am. Um it is the first time that this conference is happening in North America. Um so all of those of you from North America, please come. Um uh it will be uh it will be lovely to have you. Um and uh it's a you know premier conference on active inference of course. We'll be having a lot of great speakers. Carl will be there in person. So if you want to meet Carl in person, this is your chance. He doesn't get out often uh much uh anymore uh by his own admission. So if you want to meet Carl in person, come. But we'll also be having Ryan Smith, Chris Matthysse, and a number of other wonderful speakers um on the Beijian brain and active inference who'll be present. Um I am one of the co-chairs of the conference. I uh we we we put in a bid for Montreal. We won. Um which is great but also terrifying because we have to fill the seats. So please register. Early bird is still available until the 28th. Uh we we extended the early bird period. So, if you go on the website, you don't see the early bird extension, it's fine. The links work. Uh, you can buy your tickets up until next week. Um, so, uh, please get them because the price does go up afterwards. Um, and, uh, we'd love to see you in Montreal. Um, the call for submissions is still open. You can submit extended abstracts or full papers as you wish. Um, and we expect that the majority of of of applica of submissions, if they're not selected for talks, will at least be selected for an abstract. We can't commit, we can't promise that obviously if somebody produced something that our peer reviewers do not like then it won't get in but most things will at least be an abstract. So please do um submit and we look forward to seeing you in Montreal. Um and the website is just if you if you Google IY IWI 2025 you will find it. Um it's it's a GitHub website. Um that's it. Awesome. Thank you. Questions? Great. Yes, those in the live chat. Please feel free to write more questions and I will just read them from the top. Okay. Andrew P writes, "Very exciting. Thank you for the presentation. Always on the search for measurable substrates here. You briefly mention the relationship between gamma and dopamineergic activity. I've been fascinated by the prospect of aligning model components with neurotransmissions. The active inference paradol textbook 2022 provides a table on some potential evidence for likelihood precision being more relatable to acetylcholine or serotonin for interosceptive likelihood. Any thoughts on this or other neurotransmitter cognitive relationships? Yeah, for sure. So I think um uh the the two big ones we often talk about right are I guess three if you count the serotonin for the interception um are the um dopamine for for prior precision and the um uh acetylcholine for attention and and likelihood precision uh likelihood precision by means of attention essentially it's how you manipulate attention um and so you can deploy it in different places. And what's really fun about that is that you could theoretically deploy it differentially. So you could have uh deployment of attention to specific stimula but not others. Um which is relevant because we can we can or orthogonalize things in active inference. So it's nice in that way. Um so I think those are the big ones. I think there is some empirical validation for the dopamine one. The acetylon is I think a little bit more uh theoretical in nature. Um but uh but that is the the story. And I I think it's interesting when you think about the fact that um you know in some of the dementias we have acetylcholine uh reduction um and you have uh hallucinations and delusions um that are often a bit different than you get in psychosis. There there's similarities but also differences um uh you know uh that that might be lead to them being more sort of likelihood driven than prior driven um at least in in certain cases. Um the um other interesting thing is is is as I mentioned the uh zunomaleneium the new antisycchotic is actually a procolonergic uh antisycchotic uh and it's also the uh the only other really significantly procolic antisycchotic least that that I use commonly is clausipine which is the best antisycotic um which has a bit of uh colonergic agonist effect um and that may be why it's so good we don't Clausify is a very dirty drug. It it basically touches every receptor. So we don't really know why it works, but it works. Um and so I think uh it's important to do more empirical studies. Pet studies would be good uh for this kind of thing. Um but that requires you know money and expertise in in that in those um methodologies. what's really relevant um is making sure that one does not get too wrapped up in just the neurotransmitter story. So one idea that we've had in the past was there is probably a component that is neurotransmitter and a component that is structural right or that is circuit based. So, um, that's why, you know, if you don't get full resolution of your symptoms with a neurotransmitter change, don't get too sad, but it's cuz it's probably because there's also, uh, a structural effect on the circuit as well. Um, and so, uh, you may need to think about decomposing your computational terms into a neurotransmitter sensitive, a neurotransmitter insensitive term. Like for example for for likelihood precision you could have the acetal colon responsible for a certain percentage of that and then the um uh sort of white matter white matter attractor or gray matter generation responsible for another percentage of that um uh and the sort of other component that I think is relevant to that would be um uh I lost my train I thought it's fine continue next question great yeah that speaks like partitioning variance across different levels of analysis, different subsystems, and taking the total overall cognitive or phenotypic variance and then looking at how certain parts have like additive or interactive effects as we get different measurements across different levels. But like that came up in for example insect research because for a fruitfly the affinities for a given drug might be known or there might even be designer drugs or transgenic lines whereas for most insects the affinities for different pharmaceuticals to the receptors it's just not even known. So then it's like, well then how do you um think about what the effects are when there's these uncertainties around affinities? But even if you knew the affinities perfectly, it's like there's like secondary signaling. So so many parts and yet those are intervention points empirically that actually do very naturally and open themselves up to causal intervention. So it's like not hopeless but it has this whole biological complexity which is why having the interoperable generative models where you can actually talk about mixing and blending uh across those levels that's like kind of why those model formats matter. Yes, I agree. Okay, another question from Andrew who wrote, "Does a notion of trust come up in your research? GG for understanding or treating psychosis. I suppose it does implicitly if the patient is unsure if they can trust sensory stimuli but I suppose in a social sense. Yeah. So I think it depends at what level cuz the other point right is that I'm presenting these parameters as if they were singular things but really they're played out over hierarchies in the brain right um and just because of time and also the complexity I I kind of pretended they were singular things but they're not um so yes trust does certainly play a role at the sort of almost metacognitive level of what is it that I'm thinking about Right? And where where can I place my trust in not but the sensory precision story goes all the way down to sort of the very basic like intactness of information right so there's a low precision on information because of low confidence at a very low level and then there's higher level low confidence uh probably that's been that's been uh shaped over time by that lower level lack of confidence. Um but uh but I think yes for sure trust does does play a role. Many patients are very untrusting um when they're especially when they're acutely psychotic. Um usually because they've they've seem to have learned that the environment is not trustworthy and the only thing they can resolve uncertainty with is their own prior beliefs. Um which clearly makes it difficult to have a a trusting conversation. You have to build that over time. sort of gently introduce uh a bit more precision into the hierarchy until they see you as a precise source of uh information. Yeah, that reminds me of the kind of work like in altered states of consciousness and mapping out spaces where it's like I'm sure I'm seeing this rare animal or like I'm surprised I'm seeing this common thing or I'm not certain but it's familiar. So there's all these different intersecting precisions and and beliefs about beliefs which is kind of why again like the cognitive model um is is important to to have and to build variance of. And another part I thought was really interesting about the models was uh there was a part about the policy precision. So that would and also I think adding or changing the affordance space or the policy space. So just interesting that that um there could be different steps or parts in the system like the sensory precision or signal might be a um peripheral pathology or damage or just variation. But that is a totally different uh situation than uh memory mediated changes in belief. And then all of that is again kind of factorized off from well what is done about it. Yeah. What what is in the the person's or whatever the systems uh what's the probability distribution of their action outputs and so certain things depending on sensitivities that that could be exaggerated or um even like take a a counter seeming response. So then I think that is like the challenge that you brought up at the beginning. Well, what space is optimal about that? Mhm. But that that's how that whole space is mapped. Yes. Under that toddloical assumption like well whatever it is that will be the base optimal for what it is. But what is it? Right. Right. Yeah. Exactly. For sure. Um is there anything you're like wanting to add about where you're going to take it or anything else you want to say about IY? Uh I mean I guess the in terms of where we want to take it uh the what we really want to do is longitudinal studies of uh you know we have all these ideas of of the different parameters that are going to be influenced at different stages and and and how they're reacting with each other longitudinal longitudinally through time right this whole longitudinal aspect is something that is and you know obviously discussed but um we don't really have good aside from a couple by Ryan Smith longitudinal studies of computational parameters in patients. Um it's just not something that we've done because you know you need money for that and uh our field uh has been able to do really really cool cross-sectional studies and a couple of sort of longitudinal studies but not so many kind of like large cohort studies over time. Um, and what we really want to do is we want to we we've built a battery of these tasks. Um, in fact, if anybody's interested in in in using a battery of of of these tasks, um, we're looking for beta testers. Uh, if you're interested um to to we we had a small grant from Miguel to build a computational battery. Uh, it's readyish for testing. We're just fixing a couple of last bugs. Uh, there's four different tasks that are in there. Uh, a fifth one is on its way and then we're going to be adding in all the modeling as well. and you got everything for all the outputs. Um, and so the idea would be to use this battery which measures different parameters sorry in um in tasks across time in different populations uh with different risk profiles uh for psychosis um to see if we're actually right about the sequence of onset the sequence of events that we that we are describing. uh because it would be really nice to be able to say yes in fact we do see an increase in sensory noise over time and we do then see after a lag period prior is increasing and after a lag period uh expected environmental volatility is increasing and and it's it's matching up with uh with what we expect. Um so we've been trying to get that funded for the last year and a half. Uh it has not yet succeeded but we are working on it. We were funded at least to turn some of these tasks into a proper video game. That was fun. So, we're going to be working on developing a a computational video game uh of of tasks that kind of uh like for example, you can turn the conditionalist nations task into a avoiding a dragon. Um which is kind of fun. Um but anyways, um the uh I think the future really is in getting good longitudinal data and making sure that it what we have really does map onto how symptoms evolve over time. Um and then with that the neurobiological validation um uh in subsamples of those samples. Uh so that that's the future work assuming that someone gives us money to do it. If anybody out there is a funer who uh is listening in on this uh and has you a couple million extra bucks that they got to spend before the end of the year, hit me up. I'm ready to spend it. Um and if not uh please do come to join us at uh at IY. It'll be a lot of fun to see all of you guys uh that I can't see right now. Um and uh and we're going to have a really really really good conference this year. Go seriously go check out the website. It's a fantastic lineup. Uh and I think uh I would just love to see uh many registrations after today. And remember early bird ends next week. So go get your tickets. You can register and then submit your paper later if you want. But register we need to we need to know that we have enough butts and seats to fill the space. Good. Okay, cool. That's all for me. Thank you. Well, thank you for the presentation and for joining also wishing you the best for IY. So, till next time. Bye. Thank you. Take care.